---
layout: post
title: "Caches"
description: ""
category: "sphnyx"
tags: [gpgpu sphynx]
author: abagaria
---
{% include JB/setup %}

PENTIUM 4 CACHE ORGANIZATION

-	All Pentium processors have 2 on-chip L1 caches – one for data caches and the other for instruction caches.
-	The Pentium 4 has an L2 cache which feeds off both the L1 caches. 
-	These are the components of the processor core for the Pentium 4:
o	Fetch/decode unit: Fetches instructions from the L2 cache, breaks them into simpler micro instructions and then feeds it to the L1 cache. 
o	Out of order execution logic:  This logic executed the instructions retrieved and in the L1 cache. However, it executes them on the basis of data dependencies and resource availability – thereby making the order of execution not the same as the order in which the instructions are loaded into the L1 cache.
o	Execution Units: These units execute the instruction in the L1 cache by loading them onto registers etc.
o	Memory Subsystem: This system consists of the L2 cache and the system bus – both of which are accessed when there is an L1 and an L2 miss. 

-	Unlike most other processors, the Pentium 4 instruction cache sits between the instructions decode logic and the execution core. The reasoning behind this is: 
o	The Pentium processor decodes Pentium machine instructions into simple RISC-like instructions called micro-operations. 
o	These micro-operations are fixed length and simple to process and enables the use of pipelining instructions and scheduling techniques that enhance performance. 
o	However, the decoding of the Pentium instructions into RISC type instructions itself if cumbersome as the Pentium instructions are not fixed length and simple. 
o	It has been found that performance is enhanced if this decoding is done independently of the scheduling and the pipelining logic. 
-	The data cache in the proccesor employs a write back policy but can be configured to use a write through policy.
-	The L1 data cache is by 2 bits in one of the control registers. 
-	The INVD Pentium instruction flushes the internal cache and invalidates the external cache. 
-	The WBINVD writes back and invalidates the internal and external caches. 


My Questions: 
	
-	Fully understand why we need Split Caches as Unified Caches seem more efficient. 
-	In the Out of order instruction execution logic, is it not a problem that the order is all mixed up? 

